We're keeping it simple with this weekend's watchlist. Not every gun-toting American veteran is a Trump-lovin’ xenophobe. Black Rifle Coffe Company’s new video series helps highlight the good that comes from soldiers in arms.  From the video’s description: “It’s Who We Are” honours the stories of its employees that make up the fabric of Black Rifle Coffee. In this first episode we take a look at Mohammad Wali Tasleem, an Afghan commando, whose compelling journey is nothing short of amazing. From a childhood rife with conflict in his native country, to fighting alongside U.S. Special Forces, then coming to the United States because of the dangers his family faced. Ultimately, Wali found his way back to his brothers at Black Rifle Coffee. This is his story. This is Who We Are. Also watch: Channel Zero Channel Zero: The No-End House, the second instalment of the acclaimed anthology series, where each season is based on a ‘creepypasta’ – a term for horror-related legends passed around the internet.  The first season followed Mike Painter’s growing obsession with the children’s television programme Candle Cove, a creepy puppet show from the 1980s with a disturbing connection to a deadly unsolved mystery from his childhood. South Africans who streamed the show on Showmax last Halloween are probably still having nightmares about the hungry Tooth Child, a shambling creature made entirely of human teeth. The No-End House, the second season, centres on Margot (Amy Forsyth from The Path) and Jules (Aisha Dee from The Bold Type), two young friends who visit an eerie house of horrors with a series of disturbing rooms, each more frightening than the last. Upon returning home, Margot discovers that everything has changed. The critically acclaimed series is created by Nick Antosca (Hannibal, Teen Wolf), who also executive produces alongside Max Landis (Chronicle, Dirk Gently’s Holistic Detective Agency). All six episodes are directed by Emmy nominee Steven Piet (Uncle John). DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.