Bryson DeChambeau rolled in a 58-foot eagle putt from off the green at 16 on Sunday on the way to a one-shot victory in the US PGA Tour's Shriners for Children Open in Las Vegas. DeChambeau, back in action for the first time since playing on the US team that lost to Europe in the Ryder Cup in September, fired a five-under par 66 in the final round at TPC Summerlin to edge defending champion Patrick Cantlay by a stroke. On a day that saw several players jockeying for the lead late, Cantlay was up by one when he arrived at the par-three 17th, where a poor shot from a greenside bunker led to a bogey. Right about then, DeChambeau produced his eagle at 16 to seize a two-shot lead. After Cantlay birdied 18, keeping the pressure on with a 65 for 264, DeChambeau two-putted from 30 feet at the last for a win that moves him to fifth in the world rankings. He notched his fourth USPGA Tour title since June and his first of the fledgling 2018-19 season. “I was just coming out here to try and kick the rust off and was able to play some great golf,” DeChambeau said. “I didn’t putt my best, but I was still able to get it done so I’m pretty proud of that.” DeChambeau said he wasn’t thinking eagle when he stroked a putt from off the green at the par-five 16th. “I was just trying to get it close,” said the American, who unleashed a fist-pumping celebration when the ball dropped into the cup. Cantlay, who had nine birdies on the day, could only watch DeChambeau finish up his round, wondering if there might be a playoff. “I played really good today,” he said. “I made a bunch of birdies, which was my plan. I stayed aggressive all day.” He said his poor bunker shot at 17 was the result of not realizing how much sand was under his ball. “When I dug my left foot in it didn’t have much sand, and obviously when I hit my shot there was more sand under the ball,” he said. “I just didn’t anticipate that,” said Cantlay, who was alone in second, one shot in front of American Sam Ryder who had nine birdies in a nine-under par 62 for 265. Rickie Fowler fired an eight-under 63 to head a group on 267 that also included fellow American Robert Streb and Mexico’s Abraham Ancer. Peter Uihlein, who started the day tied with DeChambeau for the lead, endured a tough day, carding a four-over 75 that included a double bogey five at the par-three 14th. He finished tied for 23rd, nine shots off the pace. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.