Steel tariff hike could spark US trade war, diabetes reclassified, and McMaster could be out.  1 TGIF, 2 March 2018 “Better do a good deed near at home than go far away to burn incense.” Amelia Earhart STORY OF THE DAY  1 A Taste for the Absurd: The politics of Gigaba’s return to Home Affairs By KEVIN BLOOM There’s an obvious context to Malusi Gigaba’s reappointment as Minister of Home Affairs: this was the office from where, in January 2016, he facilitated a Gupta-aligned takeover of the Oppenheimer’s seven-star VVIP airport terminal at OR Tambo International. KEVIN BLOOM lays out the intricacies of the case, leading to the point where President Cyril Ramaphosa sets the perfect trap. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING Trump to impose major steel tariffs Twenty-five percent import tariffs for steel and 10% for aluminium is the order of the day from the Donald Trump eyrie. From next week, if the president gets his way, foreign nations exporting to the US will face a significant trade hurdle. America currently imports four times as much steel as it exports. This in turn means that the stiff increases could very easily spark a massive global trade war with the Unite States' trade partners. Even Canada is annoyed at this. Not even a single apology was issued during their criticism of the tariff announcement.  1 Oxfam chairman and ex-president to go on trial Juan Alberto Fuentes, the Guatemalan chairman of charity Oxfam International, and Alvaro Colom, Guatemala's head of state between 2008 and 2012 are to face trial for corruption charges relating to a public bus contract. The trial and allegations come at a time when Oxfam really does not need a fresh scandal. Oxfam did note, however, that Fuentes had been corrupt before he joined the charity, as if that mattered. Diabetes reclassified in historical study Diabetes has been reclassified by scientists into five different types that set in during adulthood. This landmark research broadens the current two types of the disease, potentially leading to a far more specific treatment for each type. The study likened diabetes to a patient requiring the right blood type for a transfusion, meaning the old classification had been less than exacting in its approach.  1 Media reports McMaster soon to leave White House NBC has reported that National Security Adviser and three-star general HR McMaster could soon be on his way out of the White House. The White House's spokesperson Raj Shah replied in a non-denial, only fanning the flames of speculation of McMaster's imminent departure. McMaster has bumped into Donald Trump before, mainly for acknowledging that there was "incontrovertible" evidence of Russian interference in the 2016 election. IN NUMBERS $7,200 The monthly salary of a Kenyan MP. FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 1933 King Kong opens at Radio City Hall. The Cult Awareness Network, an anti-cult hotline, is currently owned by the Church of Scientology.  3 FEATURED ARTICLES Op-Ed: Are South African universities under assault? BY ADAM HABIB ANC’s Road to 2019: Presented – Luthuli House election team BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS Op-Ed: What Ramaphosa needs to do to fix state spying, part 5 – the information/privacy regulator BY JANE DUNCAN #CapeWaterGate: Day Zero retreats, for now BY REBECCA DAVIS Analysis: What Mantashe’s thesis says about the new mineral resources minister BY GREG NICOLSON Ngcobo killings: ‘Toothless’ commission approaches ConCourt over Seven Angels Church BY BHEKI C. SIMELANE Op-Ed: Ngcobo is but one example of policing gone wrong BY JEAN REDPATH Dear Ivanka, let’s talk about guns and schools: A letter BY J BROOKS SPECTOR OPINIONISTAS The Other News Round-Up: Cu(l)t loose A column by MARELISE VAN DER MERWE The New Order in SA: The world’s shortest political honeymoon A column by STEVEN BOYKEY SIDLEY The equalising effect of government’s ‘free education’ initiative for the higher education sector A column by LUZUKO BUKU WeatherBFN: min: 16° max 31°, sunnyCPT: min: 16° max: 27°, sunnyDBN: min: 20° max: 26°, cloudyJHB: min: 12° max: 26°, cloudyKIM: min: 18° max: 32°, cloudyMHK: min: 16° max: 29°, rainyNLP: min: 16° max: 26°, cloudyPE: min: 17° max: 25°, rainyPMB: min: 16° max: 28°, sunnyPTA: min: 14° max: 28°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$63.57Gold=$1,307.39Platinum=$956.35R/$=11.93R/€=14.55R/£=16.38BTC/$=10,515JSE All Share=57,923.16DJIA=24,635.53FTSE 100=7,175.64 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Surname Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing (Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers)
            
            Zapiro (Tues-Thurs) Subscribe