Trump lashes out at "Fake Book", Golden Globes hits back at sexual harassment, and Australian make a clean sweep at the Ashes.   Monday, 8 January 2018   “Liberation is a constant struggle. And this is a new year.” Pearl Cleage   STORY OF THE DAY   ANC's 106th: Birthday cake approaching, it is still about unity – and KZN   By CARIEN DU PLESSIS   Newly-elected ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa’s face is plastered on posters around East London, ahead of the party’s birthday rally this weekend, which will ring in a new year. The ANC’s problems of 2017 are, however, far from over, and this week will be crucial in setting the tone for the party desperately in need of clear direction.    WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   Trump lashes out at "Fake Book"   What would 2018 be without yet another controversy surrounding the POTUS? On Sunday, Donald "very stable genius" Trump continued his barrage of criticism for an upcoming release of a damning book detailing his first year in the White House. Calling it a "Fake Book", Trump's allies also took to the public media, labelling author Michael Wolff a "garbage author" and panning key source and ex-Trump lieutenant Stephen Bannon. Evidently nobody in the Oval Office was taking pre-emptive notes from Jacques Pauw.   All-black affair at Golden Globes   Hollywood's A-listers were all adorned in black today for the Golden Globes. The message: unified protest against the scourge of sexual harassment that had been revealed in 2017. Harvey Weinstein and Kevin Spacey, in other words, need not attend the show. Meryl Streep, a frontrunner for her drama "The Post", stated that "people are aware now of a power imbalance. It's led to abuse in our industry. (…) It's everywhere." Fargo, Master of None, and The Marvelous Mrs Maisel were all big winners this year, though by the time you read this, the award show will likely still be partying onwards.   Australia storms to Ashes victory   Australia has demolished England 4-0 in the Ashes series, winning the historic match-up. The English were defeated in their final game on Monday by an innings and 123 runs. The only other aspect of England's defeat that impressed was former Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke, now 88, necking an entire pint of beer on day two.   Chaos descends on storm-hit JFK airport   An entire terminal has been flooded and flights either delayed or cancelled as JFK International Airport struggled under the weight of a winter storm. A burst pipe sent water flowing into Terminal 4, used by over 30 airlines, including Emirates and SAA. Frustrated commuters are left stranded, either camping out at the airport or fuming at the management (or both).   IN NUMBERS   100   The gap in years between the introduction of the box in cricket (1874) and the helmet (1974).   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today is International Typing Day. For those freshly returned to their desk, this will have an entirely new dimension of pain to it.   Hawaiian Airlines has not had a single fatal accident or aircraft loss in its 88-year history.   FEATURED ARTICLES   ANC's 106th: Birthday cake approaching, it is still about unity – and KZN   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   Analysis: We must address inequality in South Africa, now   BY STEPHEN GROOTES   US: The 'Very Stable Genius' of Donald Trump   BY J BROOKS SPECTOR   Evita's Free Speech: Ep.124 – Evita on the ANC divorce and SA matrics (Video)   BY PIETER-DIRK UYS   Op-Ed: The ANC National Elective Conference – more damage, more missed opportunities   BY OMRY MAKGOALE   The SADC Wrap: Cholera, a Zimbabwean anticlimax, and the Church vs. Joseph Kabila   BY KRISTEN VAN SCHIE   OPINIONISTAS   A lesson for Gwede: Theft on grand scale is committed by the rich, at the expense of the poor   A column by FLOYD SHIVAMBU   The state of the world is awesome   A column by IVO VEGTER   Celebrating mediocrity, losing nations   A column by BRIJ MAHARAJ   After the Conference: Navigating the tightrope   A column by ANDREW IHSAAN GASNOLAR   WeatherBFN: min: 16° max 32°, cloudyCPT: min: 15° max: 19°,  cloudyDBN: min: 18° max: 27°, rainyEL: min: 16° max: 24°, cloudyJHB: min: 16° max: 32°, cloudyKIM: min: 16° max: 32°, cloudyMHK: min: 20° max: 36°, sunnyPMB: min: 14° max: 30°, rainyPE: min: 12° max: 26°, cloudyPTA: min: 17° max: 35°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$67.62Gold=$1,319.59Platinum=$969.28R/$=12.31R/€=14.81R/£=16.70BTC/$=18,550JSE All Share=59,717.20DJIA=25,295.87FTSE 100=7,724.22   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          