Trump reveals Fake News Awards, Koreas reach Olympics agreement, and Sharapova mounts determined comeback.  1 Thursday, 18 January 2018 “It's the friends you can call up at 4am that matter.” Marlene Dietrich STORY OF THE DAY SABC confirms payment from Department of Social Development for Bathabile Dlamini interview 'not normal' By MARIANNE THAMM. SABC acting group CEO, Nomsa Philiso, on Wednesday confirmed that the public broadcaster had been paid R500,000 by the Department of Social Development for a two-hour long profile on Minister of Social Development Bathabile Dlamini flighted on the SABC 3 talk show Real Talk with Anele on 7 December. The show was rebroadcast on 18 December as the ANC's elective conference was under way at Nasrec. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING Trump reveals 'Fake News Awards' winners After a long delay, it's finally arrived. Donald Trump's Fake News Awards were announced today. Despite major bids by Trevor Noah and Steven Colbert, Trump opted to hand CNN, the New York Times and the Washington Post the top spots. He included a number one spot for Nobel laureate Paul Krugman for claiming the economy would "never recover" after Trump's election victory. Daily Maverick, sadly, was probably never in the running. Koreas to march in Olympics under one flag Negotiators between North and South Korea announced on Wednesday that they would march under a single flag at the upcoming Games. Moreover, a united women's ice hockey team will take to the field. The Koreas have been scaling back tensions steadily over the weeks, a feat which sceptics argue is a move by Pyongyang to mask its ramped up nuclear testing programme. Apple to pay $38-bn in taxes Apple announced that it would be paying $38-billion in taxes -- $38-billion on profits repatriated from overseas that is. December's tax bill has allowed Apple a vastly reduced tax rate, enabling them to invest over $30-billion in the United States over the next five years. This, in turn, is expected to generate an estimated 20,000 new jobs. Sharapova mounts determined Australian Open campaign  1 Maria Sharapova has launched a furious offensive on a blazing hot Melbourne court. Defeating Anastasija Sevastova 6-1 7-6, it was clear Sharapova had no intention of duking it out in the heat. Being unseeded, an uphill struggle awaits her, but for now getting to the third round was cause for smiles. IN NUMBERS 85-90% The percentage of those who fell overboard on cruise ships and perished. FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 2005 the Airbus A380 is unveiled in Toulouse, France. Some firing squads are all issued with blank cartridges, with the exception of one person. This helps alleviate personal responsibility for the execution squad. FEATURED ARTICLES Eastern Cape Drought: Rapidly overtaking the Cape Town crisis BY MARELISE VAN DER MERWE Critics claim new ANC SG Magashule wants to cement control in Free State before moving to Luthuli House BY GREG NICOLSON #CapeWaterGate: As fake news flows, real photos show drought’s effect on dams BY REBECCA DAVIS Crime Intelligence: Axing Mdluli will allow cops to ‘release state power’ on crime while new Hawks head sought – Mbalula BY GREG NICOLSON Analysis: The rise and fall of Richard Mdluli, a man who damaged our society BY STEPHEN GROOTES GroundUp: Here’s how unfairly police are distributed BY GROUNDUP Foreign Relations: SA fails to respond to US request to downgrade relations with North Korea BY PETER FABRICIUS Joburg Housing: ANC councillor held for illegal sale of City-owned property, alleged hijackers appear in court BY NKATEKO MABASA ISS Today: The African Union finally wakes up to Trump BY ISS TODAY GroundUp: In photos – protests and violence at Afrikaans high school in Gauteng BY GROUNDUP OPINIONISTAS Ramaphosa returns to traditional values of non-racialism A column by BEN TUROK The Constitution and land expropriation – how would it work? A column by PIERRE DE VOS EFF and H&M: Let’s ask the tough questions A column by JUDITH FEBRUARY The wails of righteous indignation are often far removed from the site of struggle A column by GLEN HENECK Race and Class remain our biggest challenges A column by LEBOGANG MAILE WeatherBFN: min: 19° max 33°, cloudyCPT: min: 19° max: 27°,  cloudyDBN: min: 21° max: 29°, cloudyEL: min: 23° max: 32°, cloudyJHB: min: 14° max: 31°, cloudyKIM: min: 21° max: 36°, cloudyMHK: min: 19° max: 34°, sunnyPMB: min: 18° max: 34, cloudyPE: min: 22° max: 36°, cloudyPTA: min: 18° max: 33°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$69.26Gold=$1,334.57Platinum=$1,005.32R/$=12.25R/€=15.02R/£=17.04BTC/$=11,739JSE All Share=60,924.46DJIA=26,070.63FTSE 100=7,725.43 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe