Trump in immigrant slur, Facebook makes big news feed changes, and the queen fires her bra-makers.  1 “Architecture is frozen music” Friedrich Schelling   STORY OF THE DAY   SARS Wars: KPMG ‘rogue unit’ independent inquiry grinds to a halt   By MARIANNE THAMM   Two months after the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants and the Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors announced the establishment of an independent commission of inquiry, chaired by Advocate Dumisa Ntsebeza, into alleged misconduct by KPMG regarding work done for the Gupta family, and the controversial SARS “rogue” unit report, things appear to have ground to a halt. A key witness willing to testify has been left hanging by IRBA, SAICA, KPMG as well as the commission, who have not made any contact since November.    WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   Trump immigrant remarks a new low   On Thursday President Trump ranted to lawmakers about immigrants. This time the president was demanding to know "why are we having all these people from shithole countries come here?" Trump had been referring to immigrants from African countries and Haiti. The president wanted to know why people from places like Norway didn't immigrate to the USA. Casual Friday at the White House is soon to include hoods and tiki torches at this rate.   Facebook updates your News Feed in a big way   Going forward, celebrity and organisations pages will be a lower priority on your news feed compared to friends and family. This translates into potentially less time spent on Facebook, which the social media giant claims is a good thing, as the time that is spent would be more valuable. That is unless your cousins happen to really like kittens with motivational messages.   Ford tells Ranger owners to "stop driving"   2,900 Ford Rangers in North America have been installed with the now-infamous Takata exploding airbag. Ford has instructed owners of the popular vehicle to 'stop driving'. The recall involved the 2006 Ford Ranger model and appeared to be restricted to America and Canada for now. Thus far, at least 20 people have died in accidents relating to the faulty airbag, the last being in December 2017.   Queen's bra-maker loses royal warrant   Rigby & Peller, the fitters of luxury lingerie for Queen Elizabeth II and many of the royal family, have lost their royal warrant. The company's former owner published a book detailing her experiences fitting the queen for her bras. June Kenton, 82, expressed sadness at the disapproval by Buckingham Palace, but at her age did not exactly expect to put up a fight against it.   PICTURE OF THE DAY   BY EPA-EFE/Fernando Bizerra Jr.   A child gets a vaccine against yellow fever at an outpatients clinic in Sao Paulo, Brazil, 10 January 2018. Brazil reinforced the prevention measures against yellow fever, especially in Sao Paulo, where some deaths have been registered in the past days as a consequence of the disease.    IN NUMBERS   31   The number of Republicans who won’t be seeking re-election on Congress this year.   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today in 1970 Biafra surrenders, ending the Nigerian Civil War.   Lobsters are, theoretically, immortal. They show no natural signs of ageing.   FEATURED ARTICLES   ANC's 106th: Ramaphosa goes to Mandela heartland   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   ANC's 106th: Mandela gives ANC leadership a hard time   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   Newsflash: We did it by the book, says Eskom on Suzanne Daniels   BY JESSICA BEZUIDENHOUT   The Merry Wives of Nkandla: We know what they did this summer   BY MARIANNE THAMM   'Bra Willie' eulogy: We will miss his epic poetry, baobab-wit and sage advice to leaders   BY PARKS TAU   Op-Ed: Breaking the Silence - Male Survivors of Sexual Violence in Conflict   BY ALEXANDRA AMLING   Zimbabwe: Tsvangirai’s ill-health forces debate on succession into the open   BY SALLY NYAKANYANGA   GroundUp: PRASA appoints CEO under investigation for corruption   BY GROUNDUP   Newsflash: Prospective students hurt during a chaotic registration day at Limpopo's Capricorn College   BY BHEKI C. SIMELANE   Matric results: Three good news stories from the Free State   BY PUSELETSO NTHATE   OPINIONISTAS   Dare we disturb the Universe? First thoughts for 2018   A column by MARK HEYWOOD   A few tips for parliamentarians on developing rules for impeachment of a sitting president   A column by PIERRE DE VOS   ‘Day Zero’ catastrophe creeps ever closer in Cape Town as DA’s internal dysfunction deepens   A column by ANDREW IHSAAN GASNOLAR   Zuma's state capture inquiry announcement: Commission or charade?   A column by PAUL HOFFMAN   WeatherBFN: min: 18° max 33°, cloudyCPT: min: 18° max: 24°,  cloudyDBN: min: 19° max: 28°, cloudyEL: min: 19° max: 31°, sunnyJHB: min: 14° max: 27°, rainyKIM: min: 20° max: 36°, cloudyMHK: min: 18° max: 31°, rainyPMB: min: 17° max: 34°, cloudyPE: min: 17° max: 37°, cloudyPTA: min: 16° max: 31°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$69.58Gold=$1,323.35Platinum=$984.72R/$=12.38R/€=14.91R/£=16.76BTC/$=14,337JSE All Share=59,606.02DJIA=25,504.69FTSE 100=7,762.94   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          