Trump defends racism, Philippines brace for volcano, and Vikings make playoff history. Monday, 15 January 2018 “All of a sudden, we’ve lost a lot of control,’ he said. ‘We can’t turn off our internet; we can’t turn off our smartphones; we can’t turn off our computers. You used to ask a smart person a question. Now, who do you ask? It starts with g-o, and it’s not God…” Steve Wozniak STORY OF THE DAY Analysis: Winds of ANC change blowing strong By STEPHEN GROOTES Generally speaking, in the metaphorically challenged battle between the buffalo and the tsunami, the tsunami can run out of options pretty quickly. Over time, the buffalo will emerge, perhaps sodden, but victorious. And so it is inevitably happening that political power is ebbing away from South Africa’s President Jacob Zuma, and the tides are moving dramatically towards Deputy President and new ANC leader Cyril Ramaphosa. However, Ramaphosa’s speech on Saturday was about much more than power in the ANC; it was a dramatic claim to national political power, to place him as the national leader to look to, and to put the ANC properly and firmly back in charge of the country.  1 WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING Trump defends racist remarks President Trump on Sunday attempted to walk back his comments calling Africa a shithole. Speaking from the Florida Trump International Golf Club, the least-racist racist quipped "I'm not a racist. I am the least racist person you have ever interviewed, that I can tell you." Evidently, it's the rest of the world that are complete idiots. Thousands flee as Philippines volcano rumbles A volcano 330km southwest of Manila could erupt in days, officials have warned. At least 12,000 residents living within 7km of the eruption zone have been evacuated. The summit of Mayon has been rumbling for the past 24 hours, glowing red. This specific volcano last erupted in 2014, but experts now believe that 2017's iteration is going to run hotter and further than before. Abbas slams Trump peace offer President Trump's recognition of Jerusalem as Israel's capital is a "slap of the century." This was according to Palestinian president Mahmud Abbas on Sunday. Pulling no punches, Abbas accused Israel of ending the Oslo peace accords with its current actions and called US ambassador to the UN Nikki Haley a "disgrace". With current tensions between Israel and the rest of the Middle East at a high water mark, expect Google hits for "third intifada" to soar any day now. Vikings and Jaguars advance to conference finals In a duo of NFL playoff upsets, the Pittsburgh Steelers and New Orleans Saints both crashed out in last-second plays. Their defeats mean that the Minnesota Vikings, who defeated the Saints, will have a possible first shot at the NFL Super Bowl since 1977. The Jaguars, who created season-high stats in defeating the Steelers, will now have to face the New England Patriots, for whom the Super Bowl is considered the default season result. IN NUMBERS $3.77  1 The amount donated by the people of Cameroon to the New York City during the Great Depression. FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 1876 the first Afrikaans newspaper, Die Afrikaanse Patriot, is published. Sean Bean (Ned Stark) has a deaths-in-film ratio of 0.32/film and 0.38/series episode. FEATURED ARTICLES Analysis: Winds of ANC change blowing strong  1 BY STEPHEN GROOTES Cape Town Mafia: Biggest underworld trial to expose politically connected in city’s economy of the night BY MARIANNE THAMM Parliamentary Notebook: From a Zuma exit to State Capture and land expropriation, a rocky year ahead BY MARIANNE MERTEN Stay of execution as De Lille faces 60 days of scrutiny BY MARELISE VAN DER MERWE OPINIONISTAS What does a Ramaphosa win mean for the ANC in the Western Cape? A column by YONELA DIKO From the Inside: Our ‘industrial relations’ regime in schools plays Russian Roulette with kids’ future A column by HELEN ZILLE Ramaphosa sets the stage for a buffalo market A column by GWEN NGWENYA It’s sheep slaughtering and fox hunting season at Luthuli House A column by PAUL HOFFMAN WeatherBFN: min: 19° max 36°, cloudyCPT: min: 16° max: 21°,  rainyDBN: min: 20° max: 28°, cloudyEL: min: 19° max: 27°, sunnyJHB: min: 15° max: 31°, cloudyKIM: min: 22° max: 37°, cloudyMHK: min: 21° max: 37°, cloudyPMB: min: 16° max: 34°, cloudyPE: min: 17° max: 29°, cloudyPTA: min: 17° max: 34°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$69.87Gold=$1,337.63Platinum=$994.32R/$=12.36R/€=15.08R/£=16.97BTC/$=13,531JSE All Share=60,083.13DJIA=25,803.19FTSE 100=7,778.64 Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe