California couple arrested for child torture, Cranberries lead singer passes away, and Russians cut back on the drinking. Tuesday, 16 January 2018 "Hath not the potter power over the clay, to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?" The Bible, Romans STORY OF THE DAY Scorpio: Lord Hain labels Moyane and Makwakwa ‘corrupt’, Hogan Lovells ‘either a willingly gullible or malevolent accomplice’ By PAULI VAN WYK for SCORPIO Lord Peter Hain delivered a severe thrashing to the South African Revenue Service (SARS) and international law firm Hogan Lovells in the House of Lords on Monday evening, over their handling of the disciplinary debacle of the Taxman’s 2IC, Jonas Makwakwa. Hain labelled tax boss Tom Moyane and Makwakwa as “corrupt” and accused Hogan Lovells of being “either a willingly gullible or malevolent accomplice”. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING California couple chain 13 kids in house A couple in Perris, California, have been arrested for torture and child endangerment after authorities found 13 siblings chained to beds in their home. The arrests were made after one 17-year-old woman was able to escape and call the police. She was so emaciated that responders initially thought she was roughly 10 years old. The chilling mugshots of the couple are enough to conjure up echoes of Josef Fritzl. The Cranberries lead singer dies, aged 46 Dolores O'Riordan, the lead singer of the Cranberries, was found dead in a London hotel on Monday. O'Riordan was aged 46, and the cause of death is not yet known. She had suffered from back pain, forcing 14 concert cancellations in 2017. Irish President Michael Higgins led the tributes online, saying that O'Riordan's death was a "big loss". Simone Biles abused by US gymnastics doctor American gymnastics superstar Simone Biles has revealed that she was sexually abused by imprisoned US team doctor Larry Nassar. Nassar, who is currently incarcerated for 60 years on child porn charges, had already been accused of abusing more than 100 young girls, many of whom were Olympians. Russians cut down on drinking and smoking - study If there's one good thing that emerged while you were asleep, it's that Russians are apparently improving their stereotypically poor lifestyle. A new study by the World Health Organisation has revealed that regulations have helped Russians improve their notoriously poor drinking and smoking habits. In fact, Russians now consume less alcohol per capita than the French or Germans, and smoking has decreased by 30%. Vodka, however, remains a national symbol. IN NUMBERS 2,063ft The height of a TV broadcast tower in North Dakota. It was technically the tallest man-made structure up until 2010. FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 1991 coalition forces begin hostilities with Iraq, starting the Gulf War. All tortoises are actually turtles. Some turtles, however, are not tortoises. FEATURED ARTICLES Scorpio: Gupta-linked Trillian and McKinsey’s assets to be frozen by order of High Court BY JESSICA BEZUIDENHOUT #CapeWatergate: DA hints Mayor De Lille to blame for water crisis mismanagement BY REBECCA DAVIS Analysis: Patricia de Lille and the battle for the heart and soul of the (factionalised) DA BY MARIANNE MERTEN US, SA agree not to step in the by-product of Trump’s racist statement BY PETER FABRICIUS Op-Ed: De Lille crisis reveals DA factionalism and extreme centralisation BY RAYMOND SUTTNER Zambia: Edgar Lungu’s heavy hand shows in response to cholera outbreak BY KRISTEN VAN SCHIE Evita's Free Speech: Ep.125 – Evita hopes the Cyril dawn is nigh! (Video) BY PIETER-DIRK UYS Op-Ed: Untangling the web of rules governing the DA’s handling of its De Lille problem BY JAAP DE VISSER The creeping, fatal impact of listeriosis BY BHEKI C. SIMELANE & PUSELETSO NTHATE OPINIONISTAS The dangers of false optimism in a Ramaphosa presidency A column by MZUKISI QOBO EFF vs H&M: Is there anything revolutionary in trashing a store? A column by NKATEKO MABASA Microbead bans: Throwing out science with the seawater A column by IVO VEGTER Why the ANC cannot return to its Glory Days – despite Ramaphosa’s claims A column by IAN VON MEMERTY WeatherBFN: min: 19° max 35°, rainyCPT: min: 15° max: 24°,  cloudyDBN: min: 18° max: 25°, cloudyEL: min: 20° max: 26°, cloudyJHB: min: 14° max: 28°, cloudyKIM: min: 16° max: 36°, cloudyMHK: min: 18° max: 33°, sunnyPMB: min: 16° max: 26°, rainyPE: min: 17° max: 29°, cloudyPTA: min: 16° max: 32°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$70.17Gold=$1,340.58Platinum=$998.34R/$=12.39R/€=15.11R/£=17.00BTC/$=13,820JSE All Share=60,240.96DJIA=25,803.19FTSE 100=7,769.14 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe