California death toll climbs, Trump plays down interview odds, and Ritz robbers make off with millions.   Thursday, 11 January 2018   “Tactics mean doing what you can with what you have.” Saul Alinsky   STORY OF THE DAY   ANC's 106th: Ramaphosa's speech – low bar, high expectations   By STEPHEN GROOTES   When South Africa's Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa stands up to give his first January 8th Statement as leader of the ANC, he will face a set of contradicting issues. To give a better presentation, something both more meaningful and more engaging, than his two predecessors is not terribly difficult, but there are also high expectations in the long-suffering society which he may not be able to meet. On top of it, much has already changed since Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma lost the ANC’s leadership contest, and much more is still likely to change over the next few weeks and months.    WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   California mudslide death toll climbs   At least 15 people have now been confirmed dead in southern California. Major mudslides in the area this week has caused widespread havoc, leaving rescue workers scrambling to respond. Rampant wildfires last month in the same area created dangerously loose dirt. Heavy rains this week thus spelt disaster for residents.   Trump rebuffs Russia interview promise   President Trump has stated overnight that an interview with investigators looking into his collusion with Russia in 2016 "unlikely". Trump had earlier promised that he would "100 percent" be willing to meet special investigator Robert Mueller. The interview could be risky, opening the doorway to impeachment should he mess up his answers. Given Trump's astounding ability to say the first thing that comes to mind, this could be more an inevitability than your average president.   Paris Ritz robbed by jewel thieves   Ocean's Eleven this was not. Five men armed with hatchets broke open the jewellery display windows at the Paris Ritz's ground floor, making off with millions of euros in jewellery. But instead of a tale of derring-do, three of the thieves were arrested almost immediately, with two remaining on the lam. With three of their friends now in custody, you can expect a lot of talking by the captured trio, and a possibly-swift end to the remaining two thieves' adventure.   New insights made into space radio bursts   Three billion light years away, a neutron star is emitting powerful fast radio bursts, for FRBs. A new study on Wednesday has shown that these bursts appeared to come from one of the "most highly magnetized regions of space ever observed." The strength of the waves also indicates that they must originate from a source otherwise unknown to researchers. The fact that anything from three billion light years away can be recorded is astounding.   IN NUMBERS   6.7   The number, in millions, of cigarette butts collected by Baltimore's trash-collecting "Mr Trash Wheel" in 18 months.   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today in 1569 the first recorded lottery in England takes place.   Citizens of Singapore are organ donors by default. You have to opt out to not donate, and if you choose so, you will have a lower priority should you require a donor.   FEATURED ARTICLES   CCMA: Eskom goes all out to tackle ‘rogue’ executive, Suzanne Daniels   BY JESSICA BEZUIDENHOUT   ANC's 106th: After the NEC meeting, lips zipped on Zuma’s fate   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   State Capture Inquiry: Mkhwebane reacts, raising more questions than answers   BY GREG NICOLSON   Op-Ed: Cryptocurrencies – Digital gold, a bubble or an investment case?   BY DANIEL POLAKOW, NICO KATZKE & ONNO HUYSER   GroundUp: Silicosis case – we’re close to a settlement, say lawyers for both sides   BY GROUNDUP   World Bank predicts slight uptick for SA, though growth still lagging   BY NKATEKO MABASA   Op-Ed: School governance – Less about asserting power, more about recognition and respect   BY THABANG POOE & FARANAAZ VERIAVA   GroundUp: PRASA staff try to block state capture   BY GROUNDUP   ISS Today: Somaliland’s new president has work to do   BY ISS TODAY   ANC's 106th: The briefest brief of them all kicks off Ace Magashule's SG adventure   BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS   OPINIONISTAS   Jacob Zuma, the James Moroka of our time   A column by YONELA DIKO   What's in a name? White Monopoly Capital   A column by JEFF RUDIN   WeatherBFN: min: 17° max 30°, cloudyCPT: min: 18° max: 27°,  cloudyDBN: min: 18° max: 26°, cloudyEL: min: 21° max: 29°, cloudyJHB: min: 13° max: 23°, cloudyKIM: min: 18° max: 33°, rainyMHK: min: 17° max: 29°, sunnyPMB: min: 13° max: 29°, cloudyPE: min: 12° max: 38°, cloudyPTA: min: 16° max: 26°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$68.81Gold=$1,314.83Platinum=$968.61R/$=12.45R/€=14.89R/£=16.83BTC/$=14,337JSE All Share=59,979.63DJIA=25,336.95FTSE 100=7,748.51   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          