Zuma makes last-minute Cape Commission call, Steve Bannon bails Breitbart, and DRC struggles to handle cholera outbreak.   Wednesday, 10 January 2018  1 "Do you not know, my son, with what little understanding the world is ruled?"Pope Julius III   STORY OF THE DAY   ANC's 106th: As tectonic plates are shifting, Zuma pulls State Capture Commission move   By CARIEN DU PLESSIS   The ANC kicked off the week by celebrating its 106th birthday, but it could be a different organisation by the time its birthday rally comes around on Saturday. The ground is shifting to favour the party’s new leadership, and President Jacob Zuma’s late-night announcement on Tuesday that he’ll be appointing a state capture probe is one sign of that. Then there is also news that two African presidents will, unusually, grace the former liberation movement’s weekend celebrations.    WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING   Corruption probe given a delayed Zuma thumbs-up   Embattled President Jacob Zuma announced late on Tuesday that the much-delayed, Zuma-challenged investigation into state corruption would begin. Making the announcement just hours before the ANC NEC could start discussing Zuma's removal, the presidential thumbs-up was less voluntary and more the culmination of exhausted options by Saxonwold's number one.   Bannon calls it quits   Steve Bannon has resigned as chief of Breitbart news in the wake of a conservative backlash that clearly enjoys eating their own. Bannon was cited in a new book by Michael Wolff as calling President Trump's son "treasonous" for meeting a Kremlin associate. In 2018, the alt-right term this criticism unacceptable. Bannon attempted to walk back his comments in an effort to salvage his lunch ticket, but evidently remains persona non grata amongst the Trump supporter base.   Trump shines in rare bipartisan compromise   President Trump, possibly for the first time in his term, has acted presidential. Trump hosted a high-level meeting on reaching a compromise on undocumented migrants. Finding a middle ground between democrats and republicans, Trump stated that he was amenable to a more constructive immigration reform policy, which could allow for 11 million immigrants to access citizenship. Though actively contradicting his 2016 campaign platform, at least Tuesday showed that even a broken president could get it right once in a while.   Cholera threat escalates in DRC   The DRC's capital Kinshasa has experienced widespread flooding and mudslides, resulting in a major outbreak of cholera. Medecins sans Frontieres stated that over 100 Congolese a week are being added to the list of cholera cases. While California deals with 13 dead in their own mudslides, Kinshasa has seen at least 48 dead in the recent rains and landslides. As latrines and a crumbling sanitation system buckle under the waters, a major cholera outbreak looks to be unavoidable.   IN NUMBERS   1707   The year in which a castle in the Czech Republic first filled its moat with bears. It remains stocked with the finest Czech bears to this day.   FACTS OF THE DAY   Today in 1946 the first General Assembly of the United Nations opens.   An Oxford University study established that highly religious people and atheists are the least afraid of death.  1 FEATURED ARTICLES   Analysis: Land expropriation exposes Ramaphosa's policy tightrope   BY GREG NICOLSON   State Capture Inquiry: Zuma under pressure, announces commission headed by Deputy Chief Justice Zondo   BY MARIANNE THAMM  1 Cape Town faces hefty revenue shortfall due to water-saving tactics   BY AYANDA CHARLIE AND LEILA DOUGAN   GroundUp: Setback for giant West Coast mine project   BY GROUNDUP   ISS Today: Known unknowns - the threat of cybercrime in Africa   BY ISS TODAY   Op-Ed: It's time to repackage the South African solution   BY JP LOUW   Letter to the Editor: If we address poverty, inequality will take care of itself   BY SARA GON   Street Talk: Our heritage - our future? (Video)   BY STREET TALK   OPINIONISTAS   Disagreement over interpretation is what led to two different decisions in Con Court impeachment judgment   A column by PIERRE DE VOS   Dear Professor Sipho Seepe… Let’s talk frankly   A column by ONKGOPOTSE JJ TABANE   The ANCYL brief: Meeting youth’s real challenges   A column by REBONE TAU   WeatherBFN: min: 17° max 30°, cloudyCPT: min: 15° max: 29°,  cloudyDBN: min: 18° max: 23°, cloudyEL: min: 18° max: 26°, cloudyJHB: min: 12° max: 22°, cloudyKIM: min: 16° max: 34°, cloudyMHK: min: 17° max: 29°, sunnyPMB: min: 13° max: 22°, cloudyPE: min: 12° max: 24°, cloudyPTA: min: 16° max: 28°, cloudy   Financial DataOil=$68.81Gold=$1,314.83Platinum=$968.61R/$=12.34R/€=14.73R/£=16.71BTC/$=18,550JSE All Share=60,113.65DJIA=25,410.62FTSE 100=7,731.02   John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. 
            Name
            
           
            Email Address
            
            
            First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) 
           
            Subscribe
          