Chic choc-almond friandises, made by Tony Jackman and photographed by Louis Pieterse  Ingredients 1 100g bar of 70% cocoa solids chocolate
A handful of raw almonds
Marzipan
A sheet of greaseproof paper Quantities depend on how much marzipan you have left and how far a 100g bar of chocolate goes. It’s not really a thing that needs to be measured. Have a sheet of greaseproof paper to hand. Melt chocolate in a bowl over very lightly simmering water until it’s all melted. Keep it warm so that it doesn’t solidify. Lightly toast the almonds and keep aside. Break off a piece of marzipan big enough to wrap an almond in. Roll it into a ball, then press it with your thumb to make it a little concave. Pop an almond in the middle and wrap the marzipan around it. (If it doesn’t wrap around, you’re not using enough, so start again using a bigger piece of marzipan.) Roll the marzipan-wrapped almond into a ball in the palm of your hand. Use a teaspoon to dip it into the chocolate to coat well. Carefully roll it off the teaspoon on to the greaseproof paper. Repeat until you run out of either marzipan or almonds. The chocolate should last. Serve after dinner, dusted with icing sugar. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.