Disney animation "Ralph Breaks the Internet" held the top spot in North American theaters for a second straight weekend, taking in $25.6 million, industry tracker Exhibitor Relations reported Monday. The sequel to 2012’s “Wreck It Ralph” sees the title character (voiced by John C. Reilly) and friend Vanellope von Schweetz (Sarah Silverman) venture into the weird world of the internet, with predictably screwy results. “The Grinch,” Universal’s family-friendly feature about the not-so-friendly green creature from Dr. Seuss’s manic menagerie, placed second, with $17.9 million for the three-day weekend and a cumulative domestic total of $203.7 million. Benedict Cumberbatch voices the irritable title character. In third was MGM’s boxing drama “Creed II,” with a take of $16.6 million. This latest episode in the “Rocky” series stars Michael B. Jordan as Adonis Creed as he takes on the son of the boxer who killed his father. Sylvester Stallone, of course, plays aging ex-champ Rocky Balboa, now a restaurant owner and Adonis’s mentor. Holding in fourth place was “Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald” from Warner Bros., at $11.4 million, pushing its worldwide total past $500 million. The Harry Potter prequel stars Eddie Redmayne as Newt Scamander; also starring are Jude Law and Johnny Depp. Placing fifth, and in its fifth week out, was Fox’s “Bohemian Rhapsody,” with $8 million. Rami Malek plays rock group Queen’s talented front man Freddie Mercury. Rounding out the weekend’s top 10 were: “Instant Family” ($7.2 million) “The Possession of Hannah Grace” ($6.4 million) “Robin Hood” ($4.8 million) “Widows” ($4.4 million) “Green Book” ($3.9 million) DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.