Steffen agreed a four-year contract with the Premier League champions and will move to Manchester in July as back-up to City’s first-choice keeper Ederson. The 23-year-old will remain with Columbus for the early stages of their 2019 MLS Eastern Conference campaign, which begins in March. Columbus Crew claimed the undisclosed transfer fee for Steffen is the largest in the club’s history and the most ever received by a Major League Soccer side for a goalkeeper. “City have reached an agreement with MLS side Columbus Crew SC over the future transfer of goalkeeper Zack Steffen,” a statement on City’s website announced. Steffen, who has played six times for his country, said: “Any success that I have had as a goalkeeper in MLS with Crew SC is a testament to those around me who have pushed me — team-mates, coaches, staff, family, friends and supporters. “Today’s announcement regarding next summer is a special moment for me and I look forward to finishing my time with this club on a strong note. “I am eager to continue to put in the work to improve and be the best team-mate I can.” Steffen began his career with Germany’s Freiburg and made 14 appearances for their reserve team before moving to Columbus in 2016. He was voted the 2018 MLS Allstate Goalkeeper of the Year after keeping 10 clean sheets. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.