Biden, 76, made the remarks on Monday night while in Montana during a stop on a tour to promote his 2017 book “Promise Me, Dad” about the death from brain cancer of his son Beau. “I think I’m the most qualified person in the country to be president,” a local newspaper, the Missoula Current, quoted Biden as saying. “The issues that we face as a country today are the issues that I’ve worked on my whole life -– the plight of the middle class and foreign policy,” he said. Biden, who served for eight years as vice president to Democrat Barack Obama, said he would have to consult with his family before deciding whether to take on Republican Donald Trump two years from now. “My family and I need to decide as a unit whether we’re ready — we do everything as a family,” Biden said, adding that he would make a decision in the next six weeks to two months. Biden, who served as a US senator from Delaware before becoming vice president, was asked whether his reputation for making “gaffes” could harm his prospects. “I may be a gaffe machine, but my god, what a wonderful thing compared to a guy who can’t tell the truth,” he said in a reference to Trump. “No one doubts what I say, the problem is I sometimes say all that I mean,” Biden said. “The question is what kind of nation are we becoming? “We can’t have four more years.” Biden, should he decide to run, would be considered a strong candidate in what could be a crowded field seeking the 2020 Democratic nomination for president. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.