“I can assure everyone that we are a country (with) an independent judiciary,” Trudeau told a tech conference in Montreal. “And they took this decision without any political involvement or interference.” The prime minister declined to comment further on the case, citing a court-ordered publication ban sought by Huawei chief financial officer Meng Wanzhou, arrested at the request of US authorities as she was changing planes in Vancouver. Earlier, Defense Minister Harjit Sajjan also stressed that Canadian police agencies “work independently” of the government. “We have a good judicial process in regards to the next steps. It’ll take it’s course,” he added, dismissing concerns of a diplomat row with Beijing over the arrest. Canada’s cyber security chief, however, said Ottawa was prepared for any possible retaliatory cyber attacks over the arrest. “I think one of the key things is that we always have to be resilient no matter what the possible trigger could be,” Scott Jones, director of the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security, told a press conference. Jones happened to be presenting his office’s first report on cyber security threats assessment. Meng Wanzhou is scheduled to appear in court on Friday for a bail hearing. DM Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.