Acorn TV, priced in dollar at $4.99 (R71.51) per month, is done from North America and has now expanded to become available in South Africa.  2 It also expanded into a further 29 countries including Australia, New Zealand, India, as well as the Caribbean (Bahamas, Jamaica, Trinidad & Tobago, Barbados, Grenada, St. Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent, Dominica, Antigua, Barbuda, Belize), Scandinavian countries (Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Iceland) and South American countries  (Venezuela, Uruguay, Paraguay, Bolivia, Dominican Republic, Guyana).  3 The subscription video-on-demand service (SVOD) at www.acorn.tv joins the crowded field of existing video streamers available in South Africa, including Netflix South Africa, Naspers’ Showmax run by MultiChoice, Amazon Prime Video, TV2GO and Cell C black.  3 The streaming service that launched in 2011 in America and Canada, will also be competition for linear British TV channels available in South Africa like BBC First and BBC Brit from BBC Studios Africa supplied to MultiChoice’s DStv satellite pay-TV platform, as well as ITV’s ITV Choice channel also running on DStv. Acorn TV is run by RLJ Entertainment, owned by AMC Networks. Besides the website, Acorn TV is available as an Acorn TV app on Apple TV, Android, iPhone, iPad and Roku streaming players. “Acorn TV is doing phenomenally well in North America, so we’re thrilled to continue to take the Acorn TV experience globally with 30 new countries,” says Matthew Graham, the senior vice-president and general manager for RLJ Entertainment.  2 “We are excited for global fans of British and international drama and mystery to discover the wonders of Acorn TV with addictive series featuring stellar acting, beautiful settings, and gripping storylines.” Acorn TV says it’s adding new programmes weekly and has “a wide assortment of first-rate British and international television”. This includes the first 7 seasons of the British dramedy Doc Martin with season eight added on 17 December, the Irish detective drama Jack Taylor wstarring Iain Glen, Benedict Cumberbatch in the British drama The Last Enemy , Daniel Craig in the wartime drama Sword of Honour and the complete series of the original Poldark.  1 Also on the Acorn TV carousel are the Australian cop drama East West 101 , the British period drama The Bletchley Circle , Lynda La Plante’s The Commander and Above Suspicion , the miniseries The Secret Agent , the drama, Traffik , and documentaries like Britain’s Bloodiest Crown and Britain’s Bloodiest Dynasty . DM  1 Support DAILY MAVERICK & get FREE UBER vouchers every month An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money, though not nearly as much as its absence can cost global community. No country can live and prosper without truth - that's why it matters. Every Daily Maverick article and every Scorpio exposé is proof of our dedication to this unshakeable mission. Investing in our news media is by far the most effective investment into South Africa's future. You can support Independent and Investigative journalism by joining Maverick Insider. If you contribute R150 or more per month you will receive R100 back in UBER vouchers. EVERY MONTH until October 2019. So, if you'd like to help and do something meaningful for yourself and your country, then sign up to become a Maverick Insider. Together we can Defend Truth.