This open letter to Cyril Ramaphosa is a plea for a better media and communications strategy – and no more useless office bearers. By WILLIAM BIRD.  1  Dear President Ramaphosa, I know your plate is already full and there will be more requests placed on you than Google’s search engine, but I wanted to put forward five things within your power as president you could do to make some serious inroads in our media and communications sector – inroads that would have an almost immediate positive impact. There are many more, but hopefully if you can get these done we can all get stuck in and work through the list on the others.  1 Ultimately, these issues matter because not only will addressing them have a huge impact on the media and ICT sector, they will also lead to significant positive change and growth in education, poverty alleviation, public participation and a more just and equitable society. Not addressing these factors as a matter of extreme urgency will not only make your presidency that much harder, it is also likely to ensure that your power and legacy will be dramatically undermined, as South Africa will find itself unprepared for a converged digital reality that is already here. DM  1 William Bird is director of Media Monitoring Africa.  William studied at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg where he obtained his BA and Honours degree in Drama and Film. He worked in television after completing his studies. Unable to resist the lure of media monitoring, William started with some part time monitoring for the Media Monitoring Project, now Media Monitoring Africa (MMA)  in 1995 and after leaving television joined the MMA as a researcher. At MMA William has overseen or been directly involved in over 100 media monitoring projects on subjects ranging from gender based violence, HIV, and racism to children and the media. William has also completed overseeing the data analysis of the biggest civil society media monitoring exercise in the world – the Global Media Monitoring Project. For this project over 100 countries monitored gender around the world. William has also overseen the name change of the MMP to Media Monitoring Africa in 2008. William was appointed an Ashoka fellow in 2009 and also a Linc Fellow in 2010 for his work focused on children’s participation in the media.  He is regularly accessed in the media on a range of media focused issues.  In his twelve years as director of MMA William has helped MMA grow from a small 3 people driven organisation to a committed team of 16 people, with a clear vision and dedicated programme areas.  William’s knowledge of media monitoring and commitment to deepening democracy in South Africa and the continent has ensured his expertise is internationally recognised    In his spare time William likes to monitor the media when not otherwise distracted by his young sons. Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe