FBI slams memo leak, renewable energy cuts loom for US, and Spurs snatch "ridiculous" goal against United. Thursday, 1 February 2018 “The day and time itself: late afternoon in early February, was there a moment of the year better suited for despair?” Alice McDermott STORY OF THE DAY MultiChoice and ANN7: So many questions still left unanswered By REBECCA DAVIS On Wednesday, the Naspers-owned pay TV company MultiChoice announced that it would not be hosting ANN7 on its DSTV channel from August 2018, following an internal investigation into its relationship with the channel. The #GuptaLeaks emails had previously revealed large payments made to ANN7 during the period when MultiChoice was lobbying government to make a decision on digital migration to benefit the company. MultiChoice says its investigation revealed “mistakes” in the handling of ANN7, but “no corruption”. They are not releasing the “commercially sensitive” full investigation report – so inevitably, questions remain. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING FBI hit back at Russia memo release Despite stating indifference to the Russia investigation, the Trump administration appeared to be trying very damned hard to undermine it. On Wednesday the White House announced that it would allow a selective section of a Congressional memo to be released that incriminates the FBI. The latter, in turn, noted that the memo contained heaps of unverified info and was a small portion of a much larger document. Playing secret document-chicken with the FBI, however, may well be the single most idiotic thing the president - any president - could do. White House to dismantle renewable energy sector A new report released by the Washington Post has revealed that the Trump administration will ask Congress to cut funding for clean energy by 72% this year. After Trump referred  to "beautiful, clean coal" during his State of the Union speech, the White House is making good on their promises of cutting down on renewables and reverting to fossil fuels. Under the proposed cuts, the $2.04-billion allocated for the Energy Department's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy would be reduced to $575.5-million. Chicken market - manipulation emerges Sysco and US Foods, two major American food distributors, have filed a lawsuit against significant players in the chicken market. They argue that producers limited hen supplies and deliberately altered output levels in an attempt to raise profits. Major chicken-producing companies, meanwhile, have vociferously denied the allegations, vowing to defend the charges "vigorously". With almost $30-billion at stake in the chicken market, you can be sure that feathers will fly one way or another. Mourinho hits out at players for loss Jose Mourinho has blamed his players' inability to follow instructions for their 2-0 loss to Tottenham. Spurs' Christian Eriksen scored just 11 seconds into the game at Wembley. Mourinho appeared visibly ill after the goal, with things only deteriorating from there onwards. An own goal by Phil Jones exacerbated United's first defeat in nine games. Expect an absence of red shirts at an office near you today. IN NUMBERS 47% The percentage increase in weight gain for premature babies who are massaged several times a day. FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 1895 the Fountains Valley Nature Reserve is opened by Paul Kruger. It is Africa's oldest nature reserve. Usain Bolt was offered a position as a wide receiver in the NFL. He declined due to the hits football players take. FEATURED ARTICLES Stealing the Crust: How the Bakgatla Ba Kgafela were robbed of their inheritance BY KEVIN BLOOM & SASHA WALES-SMITH Op-Ed: As MultiChoice axes the Guptas’ ANN7, Naspers bends with the political winds BY MARIANNE THAMM Parliamentary Notebook: Ben Martins’ ‘tea party’ meeting with ‘Indian family’, and the ‘powder puff’ Steinhoff hearings BY MARIANNE MERTEN Op-Ed: Eskom – time to play the cards they have been dealt BY DIRK DE VOS Op-Ed: Overvaal dispute – only our children lose BY THABANG POOE Unbanning US trophy imports: Trump jams a spanner in the works BY DON PINNOCK US: President Trump gives an astonishing impression of a real president in his first State of the Union speech BY J BROOKS SPECTOR OPINIONISTAS Good riddance, ANN7 A column by STEPHEN GROOTES What’s the fuss? Our family has been living on 350 litres of water a day for three years A column by SUNÉ PAYNE Analysing the Analysis: Why co-operation across the political divide cannot work A column by PAUL HOFFMAN Day Zero advert fails to fly its true colours in Sunday newspaper A column by ANTON HARBER WeatherBFN: min: 17° max 31°, cloudyCPT: min: 16° max: 26°,  sunnyDBN: min: 20° max: 23°, rainyJHB: min: 16° max: 26°, cloudyKIM: min: 20° max: 32°, cloudyMHK: min: 19° max: 31°, cloudyNLP: min: 19° max: 31°, cloudyPE: min: 18° max: 29°, cloudyPMB: min: 18° max: 22°, rainyPTA: min: 18° max: 31°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$68.88Gold=$1,339.92Platinum=$1,001.02R/$=11.88R/€=14.76R/£=16.86BTC/$=10,020JSE All Share=59,506.12DJIA=26,057.96FTSE 100=7,533.55 123 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe