Country braces for looming budget speech storm, New Zealand braces for literal storm, and sea levels to rise regardless of what we do now. Wednesday, 21 February 2018 "Do I contradict myself? Very well, then I contradict myself, I am large, I contain multitudes."Walt Whitman STORY OF THE DAY SAPS Clean-Up: Scopa hears of ‘millions’ mooted as IPID flushes out the mess of the Mangaung ‘Shadow State’ By MARIANNE THAMM How did a convict sentenced in 1996 to 10 years for robbery with aggravated circumstances find himself floating around the ANC’s elective conference in Mangaung in 2012, flush with a cool R50-million aimed at stoking factional battles in the ANC? Continuing the tradition at Nasrec in December 2017, pressure was also allegedly placed on the SAPS to launder and spend R45-million to buy votes. Details of this and other horrors of the Shadow State were revealed by the Independent Police Investigative Directorate at a Scopa report-back on Tuesday. The clean-up has begun. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING Trump backs minimal gun reform President Donald Trump might just be on the path to getting something right this year. The president put his support behind reform aimed at banning "bump stocks" - attachments that make semi-automatic assault rifles fully automatic. Although last week's school shooter did not use a bump stock, last year's Las Vegas shooter did. With Trump behind reform, the collective panic among the right-wing Republican crazies will become quite tangible. New Zealand cyclone strands tourists Almost 1,000 tourists were left in the lurch in New Zealand's Golden Bay. Cyclone Gita crashed against the region on Tuesday, cutting power, destroying roads and felling trees. Several local areas affected by Gita had declared a state of emergency, with a possible ferry service to be established to evacuate aforementioned tourists. All hands on deck for Budget storm While New Zealand deals with Gita, South Africans must brace themselves for a tough Budget speech today. Although there is renewed optimism in the wake of Jacob Zuma's Valentine's Day resignation gift a week ago, his Finance Minister has been left with a rather hot potato. Expectations of a turnaround plan for the country's collapsing economy are high, but so too is the chance that massive increases in various taxes will be on the table. Smokers and those that drink, as usual, are virtually guaranteed to end up paying more. Next decades vital for sea levels Even if the Paris Climate Goals are fully met, the drawing down of greenhouse gas levels will determine not if, but rather how badly sea levels will rise. The difference, according to a new study by Climate Impact Research, could be between half a metre or six times that in the coming decades and centuries. Never before has teaching your children how to swim been more important. IN NUMBERS $130,000 The cost of the safety net erected during the construction of the Golden Gate Bridge. It was deemed exorbitant but ultimately saved 19 lives. FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 1916 the Battle of Verdun begins. The Can-Can was originally composed for an opera to play during a man's descent into hell. FEATURED ARTICLES SONA 2018: Ramaphosa charm offensive extends to land expropriation, unemployment and that ‘reshuffle’ BY MARIANNE MERTEN Budget 2018: High expectations of Ramaphosa’s administration may be taxing for ordinary South Africans BY GREG NICOLSON Reporter’s Notebook: Walking with the President BY REBECCA DAVIS Op-Ed: South Africa and Mauritius – Why do countries reform? BY GREG MILLS Op-Ed: SA’s foreign policy – towards greater strategic partnerships post-Zuma BY LUANDA MPUNGOSE SA Rugby: Decoding Divvy and the SARU fog donkeys BY ANTOINETTE MULLER Zimbabwe: Anti-corruption unit probes former first lady’s ‘deceitfully’ acquired PhD BY SALLY NYAKANYANGA OPINIONISTAS Beyond the Shadow State: The Ramaphosa-struck must guard against replication of false narratives A column by ANDREW IHSAAN GASNOLAR Love of Power Vs Power of Love: A Tale of Two Stories – Inxeba and Black Panther A column by SIYA KHUMALO Striking a delicate balance as we enter our own ‘Glasnost and Perestroika’ moment A column by OSCAR VAN HEERDEN Oxfam’s admission of sexual abuse is symptomatic of deeply entrenched social issues A column by MUHAMMAD SHEIK The masses are singing to the pulse of Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation Address A column by CASTRO NGOBESE WeatherBFN: min: 16° max 31°, sunnyCPT: min: 18° max: 24°, cloudyDBN: min: 22° max: 26°, rainyJHB: min: 13° max: 22°, rainyKIM: min: 18° max: 34°, cloudyMHK: min: 18° max: 29°, cloudyNLP: min: 17° max: 26°, cloudyPE: min: 18° max: 24°, rainyPMB: min: 18° max: 27°, rainyPTA: min: 17° max: 24°, rainy Financial DataOil=$65.06Gold=$1,329.41Platinum=$1,000.70R/$=11.73R/€=14.47R/£=16.41BTC/$=11,074JSE All Share=57,928.78DJIA=24,941.41FTSE 100=7,246.77 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe