Florida students return to school, Samsung unveils new smartphone, and Spurs clinch victory despite diving Alli. Monday, 26 February 2018 “I close my eyes, take a deep breath, and let it out completely, along with my soul.” John Locke STORY OF THE DAY SAPS/SITA Capture: Supplier threatened to cripple SAPS IT infrastructure over R11-million invoice By MARIANNE THAMM Keith Keating's Forensic Data Analysts (FDA), a supply company that features in a R5.1-billion investigation into irregular SAPS tenders procured through the State Information and Technology Agency, threatened to suspend services to SAPS. This would not only have compromised SAPS' IT infrastructure but the country's criminal justice system itself. Apart from the threat by Keating's lawyers, the ongoing mystery is also who exactly owns the high-end forensic equipment sold to SAPS as well as IT infrastructure supplied by FDA.  1 WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING Emotional return for Florida school students Students and teachers returned to the scene of a deadly shooting on 14 February. The school held a "voluntary" orientation ahead of resumed classes on Wednesday. The return to school was another rallying cry for stricter gun reform, something which President Donald Trump appeared to be amenable to. A high-age restriction for purchasing weapons and a ban on bump stocks are on the cards now. This, however is being strongly opposed by the country's second government, the National Rifle Association. Samsung launches camera-heavy S9 Augmented reality is the name of the game for Samsung's new smartphone. The Galaxy S9 features a very similar design to the S8, but features louder sound, faster hardware, an emoji software for your selfies, and the customary curved glass. Never has your Instagram-based narcissism been so encouraged. Cat ears and nauseating cutesy-ness will be flooding your social media very shortly. The S9 should retail for at least $1,055, forcing said narcissists to dig deep into their trust funds. Corbyn to outline Brexit vision British opposition leader Jeremy Corbyn will deliver his party's Brexit "vision" today. Corbyn is expected to call for tariff-free access to the EU market, making a strong case for an incomplete divorce from the regional organisation. Corbyn will argue for what he termed a "bespoke relationship" with the EU, making Brexit sound less like a looming disaster for the United Kingdom and more like grocery shopping at your local farmer's market. Spurs manager defends diving Alli Tottenham Hotspur manager Mauricio Pochettino has taken to defending Dele Alli in the wake of criticism over his diving antics. Spurs defeated Crystal Palace 1-0 on Sunday, with Alli leaving the pitch to a chorus of jeers and booing. Pochettino referred to Alli as a "special kid", which may or may not be high praise. As usual, Harry Kane saved Spurs' bacon with a header, making it his 35th goal of the season. IN NUMBERS 94,000 The average number of new plants each year originating from cougar scat. FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 1616 Galileo is banned by the Roman Catholic Church for arguing that the earth orbits the sun. Sloths are three times faster in water than on land. FEATURED ARTICLES Analysis: ANC's inner war – after the New Hope, remnants of the Empire strike back BY STEPHEN GROOTES Analysis: Cabinet shake-up predictions intensify, with both Mabuza and Mbete a shoo-in for deputy presidency BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS The comic absurdity of Day Zero BY N.D. MAZIN Op-Ed: What Ramaphosa needs to do to fix state spying, Part 4 – ‘smart’ policing and CCTV surveillance BY JANE DUNCAN Evita's Free Speech: Ep.131 – Evita on Day Zero & that 1% (Video) BY PIETER-DIRK UYS The SADC wrap: Trash heap collapse kills 17 in Mozambique, church protests banned in DRC and Tsvangirai laid to rest BY KRISTEN VAN SCHIE Op-Ed: Meet Neria – her name is Elizabeth Tsvangirai BY TINYIKO MALULEKE & NTHAKOANA NGATANE OPINIONISTAS From the Inside: Why I won’t quit Twitter A column by HELEN ZILLE The Wokeness of Black Panther A column by GUSHWELL BROOKS Sunrise will come once it is in the hands of the people, Mr President A column by MATTHEWS HLABANE Educating poor children is not enough to break the cycle of poverty A column by DUDU MKHIZE WeatherBFN: min: 16° max 28°, sunnyCPT: min: 16° max: 26°, sunnyDBN: min: 18° max: 22°, cloudyJHB: min: 13° max: 22°, cloudyKIM: min: 17° max: 32°, cloudyMHK: min: 14° max: 28°, cloudyNLP: min: 17° max: 25°, cloudyPE: min: 18° max: 29°, cloudyPMB: min: 13° max: 22°, sunnyPTA: min: 14° max: 24°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$67.48Gold=$1,336.34Platinum=$1,003.81R/$=11.53R/€=14.19R/£=16.14BTC/$=9,497JSE All Share=58,715.46DJIA=25,309.99FTSE 100=7,244.41 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name
            
          2 Surname
            
          2 Email Address
            
          1 First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing (Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers)
            
            Zapiro (Tues-Thurs) Subscribe