Zuma's cabinet tossed out, some bad eggs remain, while Trump plays the brave keyboard warrior. Tuesday, 27 February 2018 “When we can't think for ourselves, we can always quote.” Ludwig Wittgenstein  2 STORY OF THE DAY Cabinet Reshuffle: The Worst of Times. The Best of Times By STEPHEN GROOTES If Cabinet reshuffles represent the political balance of forces at the time at which they are conducted, Monday night’s announcement was the final proof, if more were needed, that the ANC is still locked in a series of massive struggles, and with big actors. It is now clear that President Cyril Ramaphosa needs David Mabuza if he is to survive, and that he still lacks the power to fire even Bathabile Dlamini from the Cabinet. But at the same time, it is also clear that he does have the authority to right one of the biggest wrongs of our times, the firing of Nhlanhla Nene as Finance Minister. While there are many reasons to feel these are the worst of times, there are also signs of the best of times. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING Saudi military chiefs sacked overnight South Africa's lame and useless were not the only heads of government to lose their jobs late on a Monday night. Saudi King Salman ordered the replacement of all his top military chiefs on Monday, including his Chief of Staff. No official reason was given, but Saudi Arabia's bitter war against Yemen's Houthi rebels and the lack of progress therein is a likely contender for reason number one. Russia calls for Ghouta truce Russia's defence ministry has announced a "humanitarian" ceasefire in Eastern Ghouta, Syria. The region had been brutally attacked over the weekend, killing over a score of people, including at least one child and potentially involving chemical weapons. The 30-day ceasefire would allow for civilians to leave Ghouta, although Russian officials accused several hardline Islamist groups, including an al-Qaeda affiliate, of holding hundreds of hostages.  1 Black Panther smashes box office records The latest Marvel feature has become the fourth movie in the history of, well, movies, to make more than $100-million in its second weekend. Black Panther grossed $242-million in its opening weekend and $111.7-million the weekend after. To put this in perspective, Star Wars: The Force Awakens managed $149.2-million. During a holiday season. The movie has yet to open in Japan and China, which could push its earnings even higher. Trump ups the bravado in the wake of Florida Bone spurs may have kept him from the military, and he may have a self-professed phobia of bleeding, but President Donald Trump didn't let any of this reality get in the way of his mouth. On Monday the US president said that he believed he'd have "run in there even if I didn't have a weapon".  While NRA members send death threats to students pushing for gun control, it's always comforting to know that Trump is on point with the national consciousness. IN NUMBERS 12 The age of Nina Simone when she gave her first concert recital. She refused to play until her parents were allowed to return to their front seats after being moved. FACTS OF THE DAY Today is World NGO Day. Grant fund an NGO today! According to Welsh folklore, Corgies are the noble steeds of fairies. FEATURED ARTICLES Cabinet Reshuffle: SA government gets a full makeover BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS Cabinet Reshuffle: Bathabile Dlamini’s appointment disrespects ALL South African women BY REBECCA DAVIS SassaGate Reloaded: Susan Shabangu steps into ring of fire as expert panel again warns of impending national crisis BY MARIANNE THAMM Zuma Charges Redux: Where are the key players now? BY REBECCA DAVIS Cabinet Reshuffle: Ramaphosa plays difficult balancing act BY GREG NICOLSON Cabinet Reshuffle: Parliament’s turn to spring into action – most new MPs have strange career highlights BY MARIANNE MERTEN Op-Ed: The Ramaphosa Presidency – constraints and choices BY RAYMOND SUTTNER OPINIONISTAS Governance of State-owned Enterprises: Reforming the unreformable? A column by MZUKISI QOBO The new dawn’s first National Budget is the same old disaster A column by LUKE JORDAN DA is a prisoner of its own history A column by DAVID KA-NDYALVAN WeatherBFN: min: 16° max 29°, sunnyCPT: min: 15° max: 23°, sunnyDBN: min: 18° max: 27°, cloudyJHB: min: 13° max: 22°, cloudyKIM: min: 18° max: 31°, cloudyMHK: min: 14° max: 26°, cloudyNLP: min: 17° max: 27°, cloudyPE: min: 16° max: 32°, cloudyPMB: min: 15° max: 31°, sunnyPTA: min: 16° max: 23°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$67.68Gold=$1,330.63Platinum=$997.16R/$=11.59R/€=14.26R/£=16.18BTC/$=10,170JSE All Share=58,868.93DJIA=25,587.04FTSE 100=7,289.58 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Surname Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing (Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers)
            
            Zapiro (Tues-Thurs) Subscribe