President Zuma resigns. President Zuma resigns. The president has finally bloody well resigned.  2 Thursday, 15 February 2018 “To have once been a criminal is no disgrace. To remain a criminal is the disgrace.” Malcolm X  1 STORY OF THE DAY Trainspotter: Hasta la Vista, JZ By RICHARD POPLAK He gave zero fucks. History will give zero in return. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING  2 Zuma exits stage left Just a few minutes before 11 pm saw the end of Jacob Zuma as president of the country. After days of uncertainty and political jostling, Zuma's resignation speech sounded at first as if he were preparing to battle it out in Parliament. In the end, he was pushed rather than jumped, but the result was the same. Somewhere in the burning fires of Zuma's aftermath will emerge the spineless minions, eager to pay tribute to their new leader. There is much work So now what happens? Until Parliament can vote in a new president, Cyril Ramaphosa is by default the current leader of South Africa, assuming the responsibilities of the president. Everyone not attending Patricia de Lille's no-confidence motion will be paying close attention to the voting scheduled for today. Expect a new Cabinet. Expect new personalities to arise, and expect Malusi Gigaba to change his spots faster than Steve Hofmeyr can put on his two-tone khakis. All eyes now look towards Cape Town today. Death of Morgan Tsvangirai Zimbabwean opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai has died in Johannesburg after battling cancer. The MDC-T leader has a long and storied history of being Robert Mugabe's number one critic. Tsvangirai was always on a trajectory towards usurping Mugabe and leading Zimbabwe, but it was sadly not to be. However, within the MDC-T now linger significant problems. Despite knowing he was terminally-ill, Tsvangirai accepted the nomination to lead his party into Zimbabwe's 2018 elections. With no clear succession plan, questions immediately arise. US school shooter kills 17 A former student of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Florida has gone on a shooting rampage, killing 17 people. Armed with an AR-15 assault rifle, the gunman, one Nikolas Cruz, methodically shot through several magazines of ammunition. Cruz had been expelled from the school for disciplinary reasons. He was later arrested in a nearby town without incident. PICTURE OF THE DAY BY EPA President Jacob Zuma addresses the media during a national television address in which he resigned in Pretoria, South Africa, 14 February 2018. President Zuma has been under intense pressure to resign amid ongoing corruption and State Capture allegations. IN NUMBERS 3,204 The number of days Jacob Zuma spent in office.  1 FACTS OF THE DAY Today in 2003 global protests against the Iraq War began. Numbering between 8 and 30-million people, they become the largest peace protests in the world. Ben Affleck is banned from the Hard Rock Cafe casino in Las Vegas for counting cards. FEATURED ARTICLES Analysis: South Africa’s long nightmare is over BY STEPHEN GROOTES Jacob Zuma: Legacy of a tainted president BY REBECCA DAVIS Analysis: The night Zuma completed his transition into a has-been BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS President’s End: Jacob Zuma resigns in live speech to the nation BY REBECCA DAVIS President’s End: While Zuma did resign, Parliament had a plan anyway BY MARIANNE MERTEN Zimbabwe: Morgan Tsvangirai, ‘icon and fighter for democracy’, dies at 65 BY SALLY NYAKANYANGA & PETER FABRICIUS Op-Ed: Why and how South Africa needs to fill the gap of inequality BY THULI MADONSELA South Africa’s Electricity Choice, Part 3: Decentralised power generation is the pathway to ‘energy democracy’ BY ANTON EBERHARD & AMORY LOVINS GroundUp: Sassa files explosive papers in court BY GROUNDUP Commuters put Prasa’s ‘atrocious’ train service under scrutiny at Parliament BY SUNÉ PAYNE OPINIONISTAS Exorcise the nihilism, resuscitate the aspirations – the ANC has a chance to show the world again A column by YONELA DIKO The Murder of Thami Zulu: A call for a formal judicial inquiry A column by PAUL TREWHELA The dawn of the golden era or at least a pragmatic platinum age? A column by PAUL HOFFMAN WeatherBFN: min: 16° max 24°, sunnyCPT: min: 18° max: 24°, cloudyDBN: min: 20° max: 26°, rainyJHB: min: 14° max: 24°, rainyKIM: min: 18° max: 29°, rainyMHK: min: 18° max: 30°, cloudyNLP: min: 17° max: 30°, cloudyPE: min: 21° max: 35°, rainyPMB: min: 18° max: 29°, rainyPTA: min: 17° max: 27°, rainy Financial DataOil=$64.85Gold=$1,353.65Platinum=$1,001.73R/$=11.72R/€=14.61R/£=16.43BTC/$=9,655JSE All Share=57,399.55DJIA=24,893.49FTSE 100=7,213.97 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe