Johannesburg - Opposition parties are planning a national shutdown to protest against the long and drawn-out process leading to President Jacob Zuma's resignation.  2  Economic Freedom Fighters spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi told News24 that the party would announce details of a planned national shutdown later on Thursday. "It's not just the EFF. We are planning a national shutdown that will be joined by everyone. We will make an announcement."  3 United Democratic Movement leader Bantu Holomisa said opposition leaders were discussing the date. He however, said it would most likely happen on February 22.  3 "We want this to be a national discussion with South Africans to send a strong message under the hashtag #RemoveZuma. It's clear that the ANC is failing to remove Zuma. They are still trying to deceive South Africans with this talk of a transition. What is that? It's high time we take this to the streets," Holomisa said.  3 The Democratic Alliance could not immediately confirm whether it would participate in the planned march, only saying that a statement would be released later on the day on its way forward.  1 EFF leader Julius Malema tweeted on Wednesday that the party would be, "going to the streets because those with power don’t know how to exercise it, no-one can defeat the power of the masses".  2 Malema then tweeted that the country needed militant and radical youth and students to take to the streets and reclaim the future from "old fraudsters".  3 In an attempt to allay frustration, African National Congress president Cyril Ramaphosa said on Wednesday that talks with Zuma about the "transition" were ongoing, and there would be a report back once they had finalised all "pertinent matters". Ramaphosa made this statement after cancelling a special national executive committee meeting, where a decision was expected to be made to recall Zuma.  4 Parliament on Wednesday said there was still no proposed date for a State of the Nation Address, following its postponement, as the issue was being handled by the ANC leaders.  4 The party's Parliamentary caucus was holding a special meeting on Thursday morning. DM  1 Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe