Valentine's day deadline for Zuma looms, Israeli police indict Netanyahu, and Giant London Glasshouse reopens.  Wednesday, 14 February 2018 "Who, being loved, is poor?" Oscar Wilde STORY OF THE DAY Tomorrow Never Dies: Waiting for Zuma to fall on his sword By CARIEN DU PLESSIS There was no way that a week’s worth of playing see-saw with South Africans’ feelings was ever going to culminate in something as polite as a pre-planned morning briefing by President Jacob Zuma to announce his resignation. Zuma’s response to the ANC’s call for him to step down is still anybody’s guess. WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING Zuma's pride faces off against South Africa Wednesday was the deadline set by the ANC for President Jacob Zuma to step down or be pulled down. The Presidency has scheduled an announcement for this morning where, one hopes, Zuma will announce his retirement. But at this point, all indications are of a man obsessed with self-enrichment, so all options remain possible. Someone should tell Zuma that Robert Mugabe's rule was a cautionary tale, not an instruction manual. Israeli police recommend indictment of Netanyahu Israel's police have recommended that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu be indicted. Bibi is implicated in a string of corruption and graft charges. The country's attorney general must now decide whether to enact formal legal charges or not. For his part, Netanyahu remained defiant, stating that "over the years, I have been the subject of at least 15 enquiries and investigations," and that all of them had "come to nothing". US judge blocks Trump Dreamer sabotage A second American judge has blocked President Donald Trump's order to end the "Dreamer" programme. Protecting immigrants who had been brought to the states as children, the Dreamer programme was protected on Tuesday, effectively keeping roughly 690,000 Dreamers in the United States. Angry Tweets are doubtless en route. Giant London Glasshouse to reopen The world's largest Victorian glasshouse will once again be open to visitors. Based in London's Kew Gardens, the throwback to yesteryear can fit three jumbo jets inside and houses over 1,000 species of plants. Shut in 2013, the newly renovated glasshouse should resemble its 1863 opening heyday. A South African Encephalartos woodii is taking pride of place in the structure. Those in London would do well to gird one's parasol and have a look-see. IN NUMBERS 138,99m The height of Kingda Ka, the world's tallest rollercoaster. FACTS OF THE DAY Today is Valentine's Day. Buy your overpriced commercial holiday confectionary asap! Or wait a day and get it all at seriously reduced prices. Croatia has a museum called Froggyland. It consists entirely of stuffed frogs in humanlike positions. FEATURED ARTICLES Tomorrow Never Dies: Waiting for Zuma to fall on his sword BY CARIEN DU PLESSIS Editorial: Jacob Zuma – Man of No Character BY DAILY MAVERICK Op-Ed: Ramaphosa must show whether South Africa has a Zuma problem – or an ANC problem BY DIRK DE VOS Letter to the Editor: The price of Jacob Zuma’s presidency will be felt for a long time BY DAILY MAVERICK Reporter’s Notebook: Magashule’s Q&Ace – lack of answers a ‘monumental waste of time’ BY GREG NICOLSON DA vs Patricia De Lille: The Mayor’s last stand BY REBECCA DAVIS & APHIWE NGALO GroundUp: Endumeni housing judgment is a warning to municipalities BY GROUNDUP OPINIONISTAS Lustration: With Zuma gone at last, we will forgive but never forget A column by OSCAR VAN HEERDEN Why a vote of no confidence in Jacob Zuma would be a headache for the ANC A column by PIERRE DE VOS The EFF’s ‘internal revolution’ is a liberal imaginary A column by TOKELO NHLAPO Is the ANC committing suicide? A column by OMRY MAKGOALE WeatherBFN: min: 16° max 27°, rainyCPT: min: 18° max: 28°, cloudyDBN: min: 20° max: 26°, cloudyJHB: min: 14° max: 24°, cloudyKIM: min: 18° max: 29°, rainyMHK: min: 18° max: 30°, cloudyNLP: min: 17° max: 30°, cloudyPE: min: 21° max: 35°, cloudyPMB: min: 18° max: 29°, rainyPTA: min: 17° max: 27°, cloudy Financial DataOil=$62.69Gold=$1,327.93Platinum=$973.79R/$=11.92R/€=14.72R/£=16.54BTC/$=8,577JSE All Share=57,208.97DJIA=24,616.68FTSE 100=7,168.01 John Stupart is the editor of the African Defence Review. He has completed his masters in War Studies at Kings College and has blathered endlessly on several mediums on all things pertaining to African defence policy, strategic, operational and tactical challenges. Most importantly, he brings you DailyMaverick's First Thing daily newsletter each morning. Name Email Address First Thing (Mon - Sun 06:15, SAST)
            
            Afternoon Thing Mon - Fri 15:00, SAST)
            
            Info Thing (Special Events/Notices/Offers) 
            
            Zapiro Cartoons (Tue, Wed, Thur) Subscribe