A school boy waits for a taxi in Harare  on July 26, 2018.
PHOTO/MUJAHID SAFODIEN The nation faces a historic election on Monday, the first in 38 years without Robert Mugabe on the ballot.  The 55 political parties and 22 presidential candidates in Zimbabwe’s election are all peddling some version of the same thing: Change. Jobs. A better economy. It’s more or less a new dawn for a nation that has, for nearly four decades, been ruled by one man — Robert Mugabe. Voters and observers are cautious in their optimism, amid concerns over whether it will be a free and fair poll — and whether the victor will deliver on promises to bring change. In this nation of more than 5 million voters, though, not everyone is convinced that change will come. President Emmerson Mnangagwa has declared Monday July 30 a public holiday to allow people to vote in harmonised elections. This comes as observer missions and embassies observing Monday’s harmonised elections have expressed confidence in the country’s preparedness to hold the polls and urged all political parties to respect the rule of law on voting day. Mnangagwa, in his capacity as the Head of State and Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces, has pledged his commitment to a peaceful and credible election. DM WHILE WE HAVE YOUR ATTENTION... An increasingly rare commodity, quality independent journalism costs money - though not nearly as much as its absence.  Every article, every day, is our contribution to Defending Truth in South Africa. If you would like to join us on this mission, you could do much worse than support Daily Maverick's quest.  Please click here to see how. Your reward?  Truth. Nothing more. Nothing less. A poster of Emmerson Mnangagwa outside Chipadze Stadium where the MDC rally was held on 27 July 2018 in Pendura 100km East of Harare. President of ZANU PF Emmerson Mnangagwa addressing a crowd of thousands during the final rally held at Harare National Sports Stadium on July 28, 2018. About 2000 MDC supporters gathered at Chipadze Stadium on 27 July 2018 in Pendura 100km East of Harare. MDC supporters on their way to a rally at Chipadze Stadium on 27 July 2018 in Pendura 100km East of Harare. Nelson Chamisa Chipadze Stadium where the MDC rally was held on 27 July 2018  in Pendura, 100km East of Harare. Patrons waiting at the bank for money and can only draw $40 in Harare on July 26, 2018.. PHOTO/MUJAHID SAFODIEN. A woman digging for potatoes in Harare on July 26, 2018.  PHOTO/MUJAHID SAFODIEN. Supporters of Zanu-PF after the final rally held at Harare National Sports Stadium on July 28, 2018.